Describe the ping-pong communication pattern used in DAP (#240)
cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf: draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf.md

execution of a VDAF requires the application to instantiate secure channels
between each of the protocol participants.

## Communication Patterns for Preparation {#vdaf-prep-comm}

In each round of preparation, each Aggregator writes a prep share to the
channel, which is then processed into the prep message using the public
`prep_shares_to_prep` algorithm and broadcast to the Aggregators to start the
next round. In this section we describe some approaches to realizing this

> braodcast channel functionality in protocols that use VDAFs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
broadcast channel functionality in protocols that use VDAFs.
```

The state machine of each Aggregator for VDAF preparation is shown in
{{vdaf-prep-state-machine}}.

~~~ state

>  Start ------> Continued(host_prep_state)

Author: Done.

  |                |                  |
  |                |                  v
  +--> Rejected <--+  Finished(out_share)
~~~
{: #vdaf-prep-state-machine title="State machine for VDAF preparation."}

State transitions are made when the state is acted upon by the host's local
inputs and/or messages sent by the peers. The initial state is `Start`. The
terminal states are `Rejected`, indicating that the report was rejected and

> cannot be processed any further; and `Rejected(out_share)` where `out_share` is

Author: 😬

any request/response protocol, such as HTTP.

The first state transition is induced by the following transition rule:

~~~ transition
def ping_pong_start(Vdaf,
                    vdaf_verify_key: bytes[Vdaf.VERIFY_KEY_SIZE],
                    is_leader: bool,
                    agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
                    nonce: bytes[Vdaf.NONCE_SIZE],
                    public_share: bytes,
                    host_input_share: bytes) -> State:
    try:
        host_prep_state = Vdaf.prep_init(
            vdaf_verify_key,
            0 if is_leader else 1,
            agg_param,
            nonce,
            public_share,
            host_input_share,
        )
        return Continue(host_prep_state)
    except:
        return Rejected()
~~~

If the state is `Rejected`, then processing halts. Otherwise, if the state is
`Continued`, then processing continues using the following transition rule until
a terminal state is reached.

Let us call the initiating party the "Leader" and the responding party the
"Helper". The high-level idea is that the Leader and Helper will take turns
running the computation locally until input from their peer is required:

> * For a 1-round VDAF (e.g., Prio3 ({{prio3}})), The Leader sends its prep share

Author: Done.

  computes its second-round prep share locally, computes its output share, and
  sends the second-round prep message to the Helper. Finally, the Helper
  computes its own output share. Preparation requires two requests.

* In general, each request includes the Leader's prep share for the previous
  round and/or the prep message for the current round; correspondingly, each
  response consists of the prep message for the current round and the Helper's
  prep share for the next round.

The Aggregators proceed in this ping-ponging fashion until a step of the
computation fails, indicating the report is invalid and should be rejected, or
the last round is reached and each Aggregator computes an output share. All
told there there are `ceil((Vdaf.ROUNDS+1)/2)` requests sent.

~~~ transition
def ping_pong_next(Vdaf,
                   state: State,
                   is_leader: bool,
                   agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
                   inbound: Optional[Message],
                   ) -> (State, Optional[Message]):
    if type(inbound) == InitializeMessage:
        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = None, inbound.prep_share
    elif type(inbound) == ContinueMessage:

>         prep_msg, prep_share = inbound.prep_msg, inbound.prep_share

Reviewer 2: These ought to match
```suggestion
        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = inbound.prep_msg, inbound.prep_share
```

Author: Done.

    elif type(inbound) == FinishMessage:
        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = inbound.prep_msg, None

>     else:

Reviewer 2: We should be explicit about what message type this branch is for, for clarity.

Author: Added a comment (should be `inbound == None` and `type(inbound) == FinishedMessage()`

        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = None, None

    try:
        # If prep_msg == None then this is the start of the

>         # first round. Otherwise, this is the prep message

Reviewer 2: nit: better parallelism ("this" refers to what round it is earlier in the sentence, not `prep_msg`)
```suggestion
        # first round. Otherwise, `prep_msg` is the prep message
```

Author: Done. I also put prep_msg == None above in backticks.

        # from the end of the previous round.
        out = Vdaf.prep_next(host_prep_state, prep_msg)
        if type(out) == Vdaf.OutShare:
            # The Leader reaches this state upon processing a
            # response from the Helper, so there is no outbound
            # message.

>             outbound = None if is_leader else FinishedMessage()

Reviewer 2: We should probably enumerate and describe the different message types before this pseudocode, because the difference between FinishMessage and FinishedMessage is easy to miss.

Reviewer: I agree -- it would be very nice to describe these messages along with their purpose/contents.

Author: Done! While at it I realized we maybe don't need `FinishedMessage` at this level of abstraction-- We could just have the Helper respond with `None`. Of course, in DAP we'll have to distinguish between "finish(prep_msg)" and "finished" in the wire protocol.

Let me know what you think -- if desired I can add this back in, I don't feel strongly about it either way.

            return (Finished(out), outbound)
        (host_prep_state, host_prep_share) = out

        if peer_prep_share != None:
            prep_shares = [peer_prep_share, host_prep_share]
            if is_leader:
                prep_shares.reverse()
            prep_msg = Vdaf.prep_shares_to_prep(
                agg_param,
                prep_shares,
            )
            out = Vdaf.prep_next(host_prep_state, prep_msg)
            if type(out) == Vdaf.OutShare:
                return (Finished(out), FinishMessage(prep_msg))
            (host_prep_state, host_prep_share) = out

        if is_leader and inbound == None:
            outbound = InitializeMessage(host_prep_share)
        else:
            outbound = ContinueMessage(prep_msg, host_prep_share)
        return (Continued(host_prep_state), outbound)
    except:
        return (Rejected(), None)
~~~

At the start of the first request/response cycle, the Leader would call

~~~

> outbound = Vdaf.ping_pong_next(True, state, agg_param, None)

Reviewer: nit: `state` comes before `is_leader`, here and on L1341.

Author: Good catch.

~~~

with `state == Continued(leader_prep_state)` and send `outbound` to the Helper.

In response to the Leader, the Helper would first call

~~~
outbound = Vdaf.ping_pong_next(False,
                               state,
                               agg_param,
                               InitializeMessage(inbound))
~~~

with `state == Continued(helper_prep_state)`, where `inbound` was the message
it received from the Leader, and send `outbound` to the Leader. All subsequent

> transitions are computed by calling `Vdaf.ping_pong_next(is_leader, agg_param,

Reviewer 2: nit: missing the state argument
```suggestion
transitions are computed by calling `Vdaf.ping_pong_next(is_leader, state, agg_param,
```

Author: Done.

  the prep message to the Leader. Preparation requires just one request from
  the Leader to the Helper.

* For a 2-round VDAF (e.g., Poplar1 ({{poplar1}})), the Leader sends its
  first-round prep share to the Helper, who replies with the first-round prep
  message and its second-round prep share. In the next request, the Leader
  computes its second-round prep share locally, computes its output share, and
  sends the second-round prep message to the Helper. Finally, the Helper
  computes its own output share. Preparation requires two requests.

* In general, each request includes the Leader's prep share for the previous
  round and/or the prep message for the current round; correspondingly, each
  response consists of the prep message for the current round and the Helper's
  prep share for the next round.

The Aggregators proceed in this ping-ponging fashion until a step of the
computation fails, indicating the report is invalid and should be rejected, or
the last round is reached and each Aggregator computes an output share. All
told there there are `ceil((Vdaf.ROUNDS+1)/2)` requests sent.

The message types are as follows:

> * `InitializeMessage(prep_share)` - Sent by the Leader to the Helper in the

Author: WDTA about "InitializeMessage" -> "PingPongInitialize", etc.?

Reviewer: SGTM, reduces the odds that these names somehow conflict with another part of the document.

Author: Done.

  initial request. The payload includes its first-round prep share.

* `ContinueMessage(prep_msg, prep_share)` - Sent by the Leader or Helper in an
  intermediate request or response. The payload includes the prep message from
  the current round and the sender's prep share for the next round.

* `FinishMessage(prep_msg)` - Sent by the Leader in the last request
  (even-round VDAF) or the Helper in the last response (odd-round VDAF). The
  payload is the final-round prep message.

Each Aggregator handles these messages according to the following transition rule:

~~~ transition
def ping_pong_next(Vdaf,
                   is_leader: bool,
                   agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
                   state: State,
                   inbound: Optional[Message],
                   ) -> (State, Optional[Message]):
    if type(inbound) == InitializeMessage:
        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = None, inbound.prep_share
    elif type(inbound) == ContinueMessage:
        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = inbound.prep_msg, inbound.prep_share
    elif type(inbound) == FinishMessage:
        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = inbound.prep_msg, None

>     else: # inbound == None

Reviewer: What do you think about changing the `None` case to be an explicit `FinishedMessage`? This would mirror what's in DAP, and would make it much clearer here which case is being handled. In practice, any request/response protocol will need to send _some_ message, so I think it makes some sense to define what that message is as `FinishedMessage`. (name is up for debate, just suggesting what we went with in the analogous scenario in DAP)

Author: See this comment: https://github.com/cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf/pull/240#discussion_r1204848392. I'll add it back.

Author: Done!

* `PingPongContinue(prep_msg, prep_share)` - Sent by the Leader or Helper in an
  intermediate request or response. The payload includes the prep message from
  the current round and the sender's prep share for the next round.

* `PingPongFinish(prep_msg)` - Sent by the Leader in the last request
  (even-round VDAF) or the Helper in the last response (odd-round VDAF). The
  payload is the final-round prep message.

* `PingPongFinished()` - Sent by the Helper in the final response in even-round
  VDAFs. There is no payload.

Each Aggregator handles these messages according to the following transition rule:

~~~ transition
def ping_pong_next(Vdaf,
                   is_leader: bool,
                   agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
                   state: State,
                   inbound: Optional[Message],
                   ) -> (State, Optional[Message]):
    if type(inbound) == PingPongMessage:
        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = None, inbound.prep_share
    elif type(inbound) == PingPongContinue:
        prep_msg = inbound.prep_msg
        peer_prep_share = inbound.prep_share
    elif type(inbound) == PingPongFinish:
        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = inbound.prep_msg, None

>     else: # inbound == None, type(inbound) == PingPongFinished

Reviewer 2: I think `type(inbound) == PingPongFinished` here should be unreachable when executing this between two honest aggregators. (setting that aside, calling prep_next in such a situation would be incorrect) Only the helper sends PingPongFinished, thus only the leader can receive it. Walking backwards in the protocol, the leader would have transitioned to the Finished state before sending PingPongFinish for the prior round, so the leader would no longer be in the Continued state. Thus, if the leader receives a PingPongFinished message, it will not be calling `ping_pong_next()` with it as the inbound message.

We should have a separate branch here that transitions to Rejected and returns if either aggregator receives PingPongFinished while they're still in the Continued state.

Author: Done. I added the rejection branch, but did not condition on being in the Continued state, since we don't expect ping_pong_next() to be called in any ogther state.

Author: Oh wait, I'm now realizing htat's wrong; the Leder will be in Finished() while awaiting PingPongFinished().

Author: On third thought, currently we say that after reaching Finished the Leader won't await any other messages. I think this fine, but we might consider having the Leader go to Continued while waiting for PingPongFinished. WDYT?

Reviewer: I think we can have the Leader go to Finished; going to Continued is only tricky because it stores a prep state instead of an out share (so we'd really have two states, a "normal continued" state and a "continued awaiting finished" state, I suppose).

Maybe we should just say that once the Leader goes to the Finished state, it should expect one more PingPongFinished message? I think that is effectively the semantics we want.

Reviewer 2: Having the leader go to Finished makes sense to me -- otherwise we'd need two separate state machines for the leader and helper. The helper only sends PingPongFinished because we have to send something in a request-response transport. Since the leader should already be in a terminal state machine state, the message can be dropped on the floor -- the VDAF is already done as far as all parties are concerned.

Author: SGTM. Added a note about even-round VDAFs.

between each of the protocol participants.

## Communication Patterns for Preparation {#vdaf-prep-comm}

In each round of preparation, each Aggregator writes a prep share to the
channel, which is then processed into the prep message using the public
`prep_shares_to_prep` algorithm and broadcast to the Aggregators to start the
next round. In this section we describe some approaches to realizing this
broadcast channel functionality in protocols that use VDAFs.

The state machine of each Aggregator for VDAF preparation is shown in
{{vdaf-prep-state-machine}}.

~~~ state
               +----------------+
               |                |
               v                |
Start ------> Continued(prep_state) --> Finished(out_share)
 |                |
 |                |
 +--> Rejected <--+
~~~
{: #vdaf-prep-state-machine title="State machine for VDAF preparation."}

State transitions are made when the state is acted upon by the host's local
inputs and/or messages sent by the peers. The initial state is `Start`. The
terminal states are `Rejected`, indicating that the report was rejected and
cannot be processed any further; and `Finished(out_share)` where `out_share` is

> the Aggreagtor's recovered output share.

Reviewer 2: ^bumping this

## Ping-Pong Topology (Only Two Aggregators)

For VDAFs with precisely two Aggregators (i.e., `Vdaf.SHARES == 2`), the
following "ping pong" communication pattern can be used. It is compatible with

> any request/response protocol, such as HTTP.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
any request/response transport protocol, such as HTTP.
```

The first state transition, from `Start` to `Continued` or `Rejected`, is
induced by the following transition rule. No messages are sent or received
during this transition.

~~~ transition
def ping_pong_start(Vdaf,
                    vdaf_verify_key: bytes[Vdaf.VERIFY_KEY_SIZE],
                    is_leader: bool,
                    agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
                    nonce: bytes[Vdaf.NONCE_SIZE],
                    public_share: bytes,
                    host_input_share: bytes) -> State:
    try:
        host_prep_state = Vdaf.prep_init(
            vdaf_verify_key,
            0 if is_leader else 1,
            agg_param,
            nonce,
            public_share,
            host_input_share,
        )

>         return Continue(host_prep_state)

Reviewer 3: At the risk of being a pedant: if the VDAF being run was 0-round, then `Vdaf.prep_init` would transition right to `Finished`. I suppose you wouldn't bother running the ping-pong mode for a 0-round VDAF at all, but I feel like either this section could state that it's only defined for VDAFs with at least one round, or `{{vdaf}}` might say that `VDAF.ROUNDS > 0`.

    except:
        return Rejected()
~~~

If the state is `Rejected`, then processing halts. Otherwise, if the state is
`Continued`, then processing continues using the following transition rule until
a terminal state is reached.

Let us call the initiating party the "Leader" and the responding party the
"Helper". The high-level idea is that the Leader and Helper will take turns
running the computation locally until input from their peer is required:

* For a 1-round VDAF (e.g., Prio3 ({{prio3}})), the Leader sends its prep share
  to the Helper, who computes the prep message locally (the computations are

>   specified in the following sections), computes its output share, then sends

Reviewer 3: nit: explicit section links would be nice

Reviewer 3: Well, whichever the "following sections" mentioned on this line are.

Author: Ohhh got it. Looking at this once more I think the paranethetical is kind of confusing so I just deleted it.

>   the prep message to the Leader. Preparation requires just one request from
>   the Leader to the Helper.

Reviewer 3: nit: it also requires a response, so maybe
```suggestion
  the prep message to the Leader. Preparation requires just one round trip between
  the Leader and the Helper.
```

* For a 2-round VDAF (e.g., Poplar1 ({{poplar1}})), the Leader sends its
  first-round prep share to the Helper, who replies with the first-round prep
  message and its second-round prep share. In the next request, the Leader
  computes its second-round prep share locally, computes its output share, and
  sends the second-round prep message to the Helper. Finally, the Helper

>   computes its own output share. Preparation requires two requests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  computes its own output share. Preparation requires two round trips.
```

  round and/or the prep message for the current round; correspondingly, each
  response consists of the prep message for the current round and the Helper's
  prep share for the next round.

The Aggregators proceed in this ping-ponging fashion until a step of the
computation fails, indicating the report is invalid and should be rejected, or
the last round is reached and each Aggregator computes an output share. All
told there there are `ceil((Vdaf.ROUNDS+1)/2)` requests sent.

The message types are as follows:

* `PingPongMessage(prep_share)` - Sent by the Leader to the Helper in the
  initial request. The payload includes its first-round prep share.

* `PingPongContinue(prep_msg, prep_share)` - Sent by the Leader or Helper in an
  intermediate request or response. The payload includes the prep message from
  the current round and the sender's prep share for the next round.

* `PingPongFinish(prep_msg)` - Sent by the Leader in the last request
  (even-round VDAF) or the Helper in the last response (odd-round VDAF). The
  payload is the final-round prep message.

* `PingPongFinished()` - Sent by the Helper in the final response in even-round
  VDAFs. There is no payload.

> Each Aggregator handles these messages according to the following transition rule:

Reviewer 2: We should be explicit about when this state transition rule is applicable.
```suggestion
Each Aggregator handles these messages according to the following transition rule,
so long as they are in the `Continued` state:
```

~~~ transition
def ping_pong_next(Vdaf,
                   is_leader: bool,
                   agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
                   state: State,
                   inbound: Optional[Message],
                   ) -> (State, Optional[Message]):
    if type(inbound) == PingPongMessage:
        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = None, inbound.prep_share
    elif type(inbound) == PingPongContinue:
        prep_msg = inbound.prep_msg
        peer_prep_share = inbound.prep_share
    elif type(inbound) == PingPongFinish:

>         prep_msg, peer_prep_share = inbound.prep_msg, None

Reviewer 3: nit: all the branches should consistently do either

```
foo, bar = baz, qux
```

or

```
foo = baz
bar = qux
```

    except:
        return (Rejected(), None)
~~~

At the start of the first request/response cycle, the Leader would call

~~~
outbound = Vdaf.ping_pong_next(True, agg_param, state, None)
~~~

with `state == Continued(leader_prep_state)` and send `outbound` to the Helper.

In response to the Leader, the Helper would first call

~~~
outbound = Vdaf.ping_pong_next(False,
                               agg_param,
                               state,
                               PingPongMessage(inbound))
~~~

with `state == Continued(helper_prep_state)`, where `inbound` was the message
it received from the Leader, and send `outbound` to the Leader. All subsequent
transitions are computed by calling `Vdaf.ping_pong_next(is_leader, agg_param,
state, inbound)`, where `state` is the host's current state and `inbound` is the
peer's inbound message.

## Star Topology (Any Number of Aggregators)

The ping-pong topology of the previous section is only suitable for VDAFs
involving exactly two Aggregators. If more Aggregators are required, the star
topology described in this section can be used instead.

> TODO Describe the Leader-emulated broadcast channel architecture that was

> > origianlly envisioned for DAP. (As of DAP-05 we are going with the ping pong

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> originally envisioned for DAP. (As of DAP-05 we are going with the ping pong
```

  share, then sends the prep message to the Leader. Preparation requires just
  one round trip between the Leader and the Helper.

* For a 2-round VDAF (e.g., Poplar1 ({{poplar1}})), the Leader sends its
  first-round prep share to the Helper, who replies with the first-round prep
  message and its second-round prep share. In the next request, the Leader
  computes its second-round prep share locally, computes its output share, and
  sends the second-round prep message to the Helper. Finally, the Helper
  computes its own output share. Preparation requires two round trips.

* In general, each request includes the Leader's prep share for the previous
  round and/or the prep message for the current round; correspondingly, each
  response consists of the prep message for the current round and the Helper's
  prep share for the next round.

The Aggregators proceed in this ping-ponging fashion until a step of the
computation fails, indicating the report is invalid and should be rejected, or
the last round is reached and each Aggregator computes an output share. All
told there there are `ceil((Vdaf.ROUNDS+1)/2)` requests sent.

The message types are as follows:

> * `PingPongMessage(prep_share)` - Sent by the Leader to the Helper in the

Reviewer: nitpick: could this message be called something like `PingPongInitialize`? `PingPongMessage` is a more generic name than necessary IMO -- all of these message types could equally-accurately be called `PingPongMessage`.

Author: Done.

        # from the end of the previous round.
        out = Vdaf.prep_next(host_prep_state, prep_msg)
        if type(out) == Vdaf.OutShare:
            # The Leader reaches this state upon processing a
            # response from the Helper, so there is no outbound
            # message.
            outbound = None if is_leader else PingPongFinished()
            return (Finished(out), outbound)
        (host_prep_state, host_prep_share) = out

        if peer_prep_share != None:
            prep_shares = [peer_prep_share, host_prep_share]
            if is_leader:
                prep_shares.reverse()
            prep_msg = Vdaf.prep_shares_to_prep(
                agg_param,
                prep_shares,
            )
            out = Vdaf.prep_next(host_prep_state, prep_msg)
            if type(out) == Vdaf.OutShare:
                return (Finished(out), PingPongFinish(prep_msg))
            (host_prep_state, host_prep_share) = out

        if is_leader and inbound == None:
            outbound = PingPongInitialize(host_prep_share)
        else:
            outbound = PingPongContinue(prep_msg, host_prep_share)
        return (Continued(host_prep_state), outbound)
    except:

>         return (Rejected(), None)

Reviewer: WDYT about introducing a `PingPongRejected` message instead of returning `None`?

Other than being more explicit about the meaning of this return value, the way things are currently written I suppose someone could misinterpret things such that the other aggregator would continue to call `ping_pong_next` with `inbound == None`, which is not what we want.

Author: When would that happen? If I'm in the Rejected state, I'm not going to keep processing messages for that report.

Reviewer: This aggregator would be in `Rejected` state, but the other aggregator wouldn't be in `Rejected` yet. By returning `None` here, someone misinterpreting this text might think that this means they need to send "no message" to the other aggregator, which would then call `ping_pong_next` with `inbound == None`, which would cause the peer aggregator to misbehave.

But this is just my guess at how things might go wrong. My bigger concern is being explicit: `PingPongRejected` has a more explicit meaning than `None`, and will make it easier for protocols using these functions to specify handling.

Author: Hmm, let me think about this. We get to `Rejected()` in three ways:
1. prep_init() raises an error
2. prep_next() or prep_shares_to_prep() raises an error
3. ping_pong_next() is called on `PingPongFinished()`

Whether there is an explicit message sent in DAP kind of depends: in cases (1) and (2) only the Helper sends an explicit message, at least for now (this might change with https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/issues/438). Case (3) should actually be unreachable if the ping pong API is used correctly.

I think if we want to be more explicit, we should be consistent. I.e., in case (1) there should be an explicit outbound message. But the fact that whether there is an explicit message depends on protocol details, I think I'd prefer to leave the type as `None` and leave it to the protocol to sort out.

Reviewer: Good point; one way to resolve this, but perhaps too slowly for this PR, would be to take https://github.com/cfrg/draft-irtf-cfrg-vdaf/issues/244 -- then ping-pong initialization could be similarly fused such that `ping_pong_start` would return a state & outbound message, which could then be `PingPongRejected`.

Another option would be not to address this at all: I updated https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/pull/393 to use the ping-pong API from this PR, rejection handling isn't too awkward (and not all of the awkwardness would be resolved even if we took this suggestion).

Author: I'd prefer the second option if it's not too awkward. I just saw your changes to 393 and am reviewing now.

* In general, each request includes the Leader's prep share for the previous
  round and/or the prep message for the current round; correspondingly, each
  response consists of the prep message for the current round and the Helper's
  prep share for the next round.

The Aggregators proceed in this ping-ponging fashion until a step of the
computation fails, indicating the report is invalid and should be rejected, or
the last round is reached and each Aggregator computes an output share. All
told there there are `ceil((Vdaf.ROUNDS+1)/2)` requests sent.

Each Aggregator handles these messages according to the following transition
rule, so long as they are in the `Continued` state:

~~~ transition
def ping_pong_next(Vdaf,
                   is_leader: bool,
                   agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
                   state: State,
                   inbound: Optional[bytes],
                   ) -> (State, Optional[PingPongMessage]):
    round, host_prep_state = state.round, state.prep_state
    if inbound != None:
        if round == 0:
            if is_leader:
                return (Rejected(), None)
            else:
                prep_msg, peer_prep_share = None, inbound

>         elif round == Vdaf.ROUNDS:

Author: I'll think on it more, but I'm not totally convinced we can do away with the round number altogether. In any case I think we can make parsing context-free here.

A couple of points:
* I'm not sure notwork failures are or should be a consideration for VDAF. Ideally we can think of VDAF as the primitive building block that is used in a protocol that deals with this stuff (DAP). As an anology, we don't typically think about network failures when writing down the spec for Diffie-Hellman key exchange. (And I'd argue we don't need to.)
* Elsewhere in VDAF, parsing is not context-free: For instance in Prio3 the field being used is not encoded in any message. I'm fine doing so here however, since this is connective tissue for a specific protocol.

>         elif round == Vdaf.ROUNDS:

Author: i've added the discriminator byte and removed the round number from the Continue state once more.

        # from the end of the previous round.
        out = Vdaf.prep_next(host_prep_state, prep_msg)
        round += 1
        if type(out) == Vdaf.OutShare:
            return (Finished(out), None)
        (host_prep_state, host_prep_share) = out

        if peer_prep_share != None:
            prep_shares = [peer_prep_share, host_prep_share]
            if is_leader:
                prep_shares.reverse()
            prep_msg = Vdaf.prep_shares_to_prep(
                agg_param,
                prep_shares,
            )
            out = Vdaf.prep_next(host_prep_state, prep_msg)
            round += 1
            if type(out) == Vdaf.OutShare:
                return (Finished(out), prep_msg)
            (host_prep_state, host_prep_share) = out

        if is_leader and inbound == None:
            outbound = host_prep_share
        else:
            outbound = encode_continue(prep_msg, host_prep_share)
        return (Continued(round, host_prep_state), outbound)
    except:
        return (Rejected(), None)
~~~

Methods `encode_continue()` and `decode_contine()` are used to coalesce a prep
message and the next prep share:

~~~

> def encode_method(prep_msg: bytes, prep_share: bytes):

Reviewer: nit: `encode_method` should be `encode_continue` I think (and similarly below)

Author: These methods have been deleted.

    encoded = bytes()
    encoded += to_be_bytes(len(prep_msg), 2)
    encoded += prep_msg

>     encoded += to_be_bytes(len(prep_share), 2)

Author: I've decided to specify the ping pong messages in TLS syntax. I think to make it easier to use in DAP we want both length prefixes. (That way parsing DAP messages can be done with the `Decode` trait in libprio.)

execution of a VDAF requires the application to instantiate secure channels
between each of the protocol participants.

> ## Communication Patterns for Preparation {#vdaf-prep-comm}

Reviewer 3: All of this is written in terms of VDAFs. Does that mean this is undefined for DAFs?

Author: Yes.

 |                |
 |                |
 +--> Rejected <--+
~~~
{: #vdaf-prep-state-machine title="State machine for VDAF preparation."}

State transitions are made when the state is acted upon by the host's local
inputs and/or messages sent by the peers. The initial state is `Start`. The
terminal states are `Rejected`, indicating that the report was rejected and
cannot be processed any further; and `Finished(out_share)` where `out_share` is
the Aggregator's recovered output share.

## Ping-Pong Topology (Only Two Aggregators)

For VDAFs with precisely two Aggregators (i.e., `Vdaf.SHARES == 2`), the
following "ping pong" communication pattern can be used. It is compatible with
any request/response transport protocol, such as HTTP.

The first state transition, from `Start` to `Continued` or `Rejected`, is
induced by the following transition rule. No messages are sent or received
during this transition.

~~~ transition
def ping_pong_start(Vdaf,
                    vdaf_verify_key: bytes[Vdaf.VERIFY_KEY_SIZE],
                    is_leader: bool,
                    agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
                    nonce: bytes[Vdaf.NONCE_SIZE],
                    public_share: bytes,

>                     host_input_share: bytes) -> State:

Author: Ack, I think this would be overly verbose. I'd rather keep it implicit.

>                     host_input_share: bytes) -> State:

Author: Host and Peer are common terms used in IETF specs (host == "us", peer == "them")

>                     host_input_share: bytes) -> State:

Reviewer 3: I don't agree, but I suppose this isn't ambiguous or impossible to implement as written, so I'll defer to the VDAF editors.

  share, then sends the prep message to the Leader. Preparation requires just
  one round trip between the Leader and the Helper.

* For a 2-round VDAF (e.g., Poplar1 ({{poplar1}})), the Leader sends its
  first-round prep share to the Helper, who replies with the first-round prep
  message and its second-round prep share. In the next request, the Leader
  computes its second-round prep share locally, computes its output share, and
  sends the second-round prep message to the Helper. Finally, the Helper
  computes its own output share. Preparation requires two round trips.

* In general, each request includes the Leader's prep share for the previous
  round and/or the prep message for the current round; correspondingly, each
  response consists of the prep message for the current round and the Helper's
  prep share for the next round.

The Aggregators proceed in this ping-ponging fashion until a step of the
computation fails, indicating the report is invalid and should be rejected, or
preparation is completed. All told there there are `ceil((Vdaf.ROUNDS+1)/2)`
requests sent.

Each message in the ping-pong protocol is structured as follows (expressed in

> TLS syntax {{!RFC8446}}):

Author: Done.

~~~
enum {
  initalize(0),
  continue(1),
  finish(2),
  (255)
} MessageType;

struct {
  MessageType type;
  select (Message.type) {
    case initialize:
      opaque prep_share<0..2^32-1>;
    case continue:
      opaque prep_msg<0..2^32-1>;
      opaque prep_share<0..2^32-1>;
    case finish:
      opaque prep_msg<0..2^32-1>;

>   };

Reviewer 2: I would prefer adding the `finished` message type back, as otherwise DAP will need an additional discriminator bit outside the `Message` struct to indicate whether or not a helper's response includes a `Message` or not.

Author: True, but I think that discriminator bit is needed in DAP in any case. Having done a few passes of this, I think this is the simplest design we have. (I'd encourage you to also review the corresponding DAP PR -- perhaps you'll have an idea to simplify things a bit more.)

Reviewer: I think this is OK (if slightly confusing due to similar names being used in DAP & VDAF): `finished` exists at the DAP level, as one of the possible states of a `PrepareStep`, and works as you describe; this VDAF `finish` message would be embedded in a DAP `PrepareStep` of type `continue`.

Reviewer: (that said, this _is_ somewhat confusing; maybe there's a better way to state this abstraction boundary?)

Author: Perhaps. I sort of like what we have though now. It's at least consistent: If there is an actual message to send, then `outbound` will be `None`; otherwise `outbound != None`. This is useful in DAP because the Leader and Helper do different things in this case.

    )
~~~

(The auxiliary function `ping_pong_transition()` is defined at the end of this
section.) The input `inbound` denotes the Helper's last inbound message. This
parameter is optional since initially there is no inbound message.

Likewise, the Helper computes each state transition according to the following
algorithm:

~~~ transition
def ping_pong_resp(Vdaf,
                   agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
                   state: State,
                   inbound: Message,
                   ) -> (State, Optional[bytes]):
    if inbound.type == 0: # initialize
        prep_msg = None
        peer_prep_share = inbound.prep_share
    elif inbound.type == 1: # continue
        prep_msg = inbound.prep_msg
        peer_prep_share = inbound.prep_share
    else: # finish
        prep_msg = inbound.prep_msg
        peer_prep_share = None

    return Vdaf.ping_pong_transition(
        agg_param,
        prep_msg,
        peer_prep_share,
        state.prep_state,
    )
~~~

At the start of each request/response cycle, the Leader runs

~~~
(state, outbound) = Vdaf.ping_pong_req(agg_param, state, inbound)
~~~

with `state == Continued(leader_prep_state)` and sends `outbound` to the

> Helper. For the initial request, `inbound == None`. To response to the Leader,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Helper. For the initial request, `inbound == None`. To respond to the Leader,
```

The state machine of each Aggregator for VDAF preparation is shown in
{{vdaf-prep-state-machine}}.

~~~ state
 START --> CONTINUED(round, host_prep_state)
  |                |                    |
  |                |                    v
  +--> REJECTED <--+     FINISHED(out_share)
~~~
{: #vdaf-prep-state-machine title="State machine for VDAF preparation."}

State transitions are made when the state is acted upon by the host's local
inputs and/or messages sent by the peers. The initial state is `START`. The
terminal states are `REJECTED`, indicating that the report was rejected and
cannot be processed any further; and `FINISHED(out_share)` where `out_share` is
the Aggreagtor's recovered output share.

The first state transition is induced by the following transition rule:

~~~ transition
State START

def prep_start(Vdaf,
               vdaf_verify_key: bytes[Vdaf.VERIFY_KEY_SIZE],
               is_leader: bool,
               agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
               nonce: bytes[Vdaf.NONCE_SIZE],
               public_share: bytes,
               host_input_share: bytes):
    try:
        host_prep_state = Vdaf.prep_init(
            vdaf_verify_key,

>             0 if is_leader else 1,

Author: Sorry, I'm not sure I understand this comment.

>             0 if is_leader else 1,

Reviewer 2: Since prep_start can only pass an aggregator ID of 0 or 1 to prep_init, it should go under "Ping-Pong Topology (Only Two Aggregators)", rather than this more generic section.

>             0 if is_leader else 1,

Author: Ohhhhh good call!

            agg_param,
            nonce,
            public_share,
            host_input_share,
        )

>         state CONTINUED(0, host_prep_state)

Author: Reviewer note: This obviously is not grammatically correct Python. Our goal thus far was to have all pseudocode in the draft be runnable, so we might consider how to do so neatly. However in the interest of moving DAP-05 forward, I would prefer to not be too nit-picky, at least for the moment.

    except:
        state REJECTED
    return None
~~~

If the state is `REJECTED`, then processing halts. Otherwise, if the state is
`CONTINUE`, then processing continues using the following transition rule until
a terminal state is reached.

## Ping-Pong Topology (Only Two Aggregators)

For VDAFs with precisely two Aggregators (i.e., `Vdaf.SHARES == 2`), the
following "ping pong" communication pattern can be used. It is compatible with
any request/response protocol, such as HTTP.

Let us call the initiating party the "Leader" and the responding party the
"Helper". The high-level idea is that the Leader and Helper will take turns
running the computation locally until input from their peer is required:

* For a 1-round VDAF (e.g., Prio3 ({{prio3}})), The Leader sends its prep share
  to the Helper, who computes the prep message locally (the computations are
  specified in the following sections), computes its output share, then sends
  the prep message to the Leader. Preparation requires just one request from
  the Leader to the Helper.

> * For a 2-round VDAF (e.g., Poplqr1 ({{poplar1}})), the Leader sends its

Reviewer 2: nit: typo
```suggestion
* For a 2-round VDAF (e.g., Poplar1 ({{poplar1}})), the Leader sends its
```

  sends the second-round prep message to the Helper. Finally, the Helper
  computes its own output share. Preparation requires two requests.

* In general, each request includes the Leader's prep share for the previous
  round and/or the prep message for the current round; correspondingly, each
  response consists of the prep message for the current round and the Helper's
  prep share for the next round.

The Aggregators proceed in this ping-ponging fashion until a step of the
computation fails, indicating the report is invalid and should be rejected, or
the last round is reached and each Aggregator computes an output share. All
told there there are `ceil((Vdaf.ROUNDS+1)/2)` requests sent.

~~~ transition
State CONTINUED(round, host_prep_state)

def ping_pong_prep_next(Vdaf,
                        is_leader: bool,
                        agg_param: Vdaf.AggParam,
                        inbound_type: Optional[str],
                        inbound: Optional[bytes]):
    if inbound_type == "initialize":
        prep_msg, peer_prep_share = None, inbound
    elif inbound_type == "continue":
        l = Vdaf.prep_size(agg_param, round)

>         prep_msg, prep_share = inbound[:l], inbound[l:]

Author: @branlwyd note that we're coalescing the previous prep message with the next prep share here. This is a change from https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/pull/461.

Author: This is tricky because we're trying to get as close to runnable code as possible. But your suggestion here matches @divergentdave's suggestion above pretty well, so let me see if I can finesse this.

>         round_num += 1

Author: @branlwyd to ensure that the round number is computed properly I believe we need increment the counter here. Please double check my math here. (This is a change from https://github.com/ietf-wg-ppm/draft-ietf-ppm-dap/pull/461.)

Reviewer: Thinking to a large-round VDAF, this round-counting scheme tracks a consistent sequence of rounds between the Leader & Helper; specifically 1→3→5→...

But I think this line should be dropped, so that "continue" messages only increment the round counter once, and the Leader & Helper compute the round sequence 1→2→3→...

The reason I think this is a good change is that the purpose of the round-counter is to track progress/allow for retries at the level of the VDAF-evaluation protocol (e.g. DAP). If the sequence of rounds is 1→3→5→..., then the higher-level protocol has a failure mode if an attempt is made to retry/advance to an even-numbered round; this failure mode does not exist if the round sequence is 1→2→3→...

(I'm not sure we need to include round counting at all in these functions. I'd be happy if these functions defined the sequence of VDAF calls, and left the definition of any retry mechanisms up to the VDAF-evaluation protocol. ISTM that a hypothetical DAP-competitor protocol might define a different retry mechanism, at which point this round-counting is vestigal. Also, these functions are defining a round counter for each report, while even DAP tracks round at the level of an aggregation job, i.e. across many reports.)

Author: Right, my goal here was to have `round_num` match the VDAF round, not the ping-pong round. If we go with your suggestion then we'd need to change
```python
if round_num == Vdaf.ROUNDS:
```
to
```python
if round_num = ceil((Vdaf.ROUNDS+1)/2):
```
Does that sound right?

Author: Ahhh you're right! What would be useful for DAP would be the "request number" instead of the round number. I started working on this change but found a problem: We now have a callback on `Vdaf` for getting the size of the prep message (`Vdaf.prep_size()`) and unfortunately this needs the round number as input.

Author: One way around this would be to length-prefix the prep message in the coalesced `Continue` message type so that we can parse the two. It sort of breaks with the design pattern we've been following for VDAF but I'd be fine with this if you think tracking the request number would be useful.

Author: Good call :)

I've removed `Vdaf.prep_size()` and removed the round counter from the state.

        (host_prep_state, host_prep_share) = out
        round_num += 1

        if peer_prep_share != None:
            prep_shares = [peer_prep_share, host_prep_share]
            if is_leader:
                prep_shares.reverse()
            prep_msg = Vdaf.prep_shares_to_prep(
                agg_param,
                prep_shares,
            )
            out = Vdaf.prep_next(host_prep_state, prep_msg)
            if round_num == Vdaf.ROUNDS:
                state FINISHED(out)
                return ("finish", prep_msg)
            (host_prep_state, host_prep_share) = out

        state CONTINUED(round_num, host_prep_state)
        if is_leader and round_num == 1:
            return ("initialize", host_prep_share)
        else:
            return ("continue", host_prep_share)
    except:
        state REJECTED
        return (None, None)
~~~

To initialize preparation, the Leader would call

~~~
(outbound_type, outbound) = Vdaf.ping_pong_prep_next(True,
                                                     agg_param,
                                                     None,
                                                     None)
~~~

> in state `CONTINUED(0, leader_prep_state)` and send `outbound` to the Helper.

Reviewer 2: This should probably be reworded, "to initialize preparation" seems to be counter to already being in the state CONTINUED. If anything is initializing preparation, it seems like it ought to be `prep_start`. Maybe, "At the start of a request/response cycle, ..."?

Author: Done. Changed to "At the start of the **first** request/response cycle..."

The protocol might also include an indication of what type of message to expect

> (i.e., some encoding of `outbound_type`).

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't the outbound type be known based on the number of rounds and the current round? This sentence seems to hedge enough that we could probably delete it.

Author: Following @branlwyd's suggestion I just dropped the inbound/outbound type indication and simplified the text here.
